---
layout: post
title:      "Regarding Disillusionment and Disenchantment in Data Science"
date:       2020-02-03 21:22:52 +0000
permalink:  regarding_disillusionment_and_disenchantment_in_data_science
---


A while back, as I was in the process of making the decision to start the Flatiron School's course in data science, I was reading some material about why data scientists were leaving their jobs. I was interested in that kind of perspective because I wanted to know any reason why I should avoid the field and think about doing something other than sinking five months of my life into an immersive course when I could be out looking for work doing the things I'd already been doing.  The general feeling I got during this research was about how data scientists were getting frustrated by not being able to spend their time crafting brilliant new code to press their algorithms into uncharted territory; how they were continually being expected to perform ad hoc reports whenever management needed them, how they were expected to be the go-to person for any data-related request or project, and how politics were frustrating their efforts to have a productive impact on the greater entity.

I'll start off by noting that I get how the reality of a job can be frustrating. For example, I've heard about how programmers can wind up spending 90% of their time in meetings and coordinating on figuring out exactly *what* they're supposed to be building, and 10% of their time actually coding. I doubt that's what computer science students have in mind when they're grinding out class after class of intense programming problems. Then comes the real world.

Note that I'll be writing mostly about the business world, as I haven't worked in acedemia and haven't been a university student in over twenty years. Though I do know people who work in that world, I don't want to speak out of ignorance, so I'll leave that side of things alone.

So this is me convincing myself to push on despite all that.

All right. politics.

It's sometimes hard to know what people mean by the word. It can be something as simple as having to get up out of their chairs and shake hands, go to meetings, talk to people in other departments, get to know the management personnel, and generally act like a decent human being to other people who are struggling and overworked and just trying to get through their day's work. I have seen some real politics at play. I've seen whole departents get axed because certain managers had more sway with the executives than the unlucky supervisors of the terminated teams. But when we refer to every decision made outside of our own sphere as  'politics,' we first dilude the meaning of the term as it relates to a terrible practice, and secondly absolve ourselves from taking responsibility for our own place in the company. Yes, people *do* need to have a good perception of me. In most other contexts it would be self-evident. Yes, I *do* need to do simple work that's beneath my abilities sometimes just because somebody asked for it and they fingered me as the person to do it. You can't hire a specialist for everything. And I do have to put myself in front of the right people sometimes. Nobody can get promoted without first being noticed, and if I'm *not* putting yourself in front of anyone, is my work having any real impact?

Another problem is that it sounds like a company might not really be prepared for data scientists on their staff. It's a relatively new type of position, at least in terms of widespread business, and companies are figuring out not only how to fit them into their models, but what the title even means. I anticipate it's something I'll have to be prepared to navigate. Some businesses might not have the infrastructure to support their needs. No doubt this can cause a lot of frustration with new hires, especially if they are on a junior level. But it can also be seen as an opportunity. If I'm the person who can help to build that infrastructure, who can help craft a data scientist's role within a company, then I will make an invaluable place for myself in that company. Not only is it edifying on a personal level, not only does it make for greater job satisfaction, but it cements my value in the greater landscape. Layoffs are a real thing, and I've seen many rounds of them at every company I've worked for, including having been the victim of one myself (I had only been at the company for less than a year and they shut down the regional office completely--no hard feelings on my part).

As a data scientist, or a data anayst or business analyst or someone in any other data-centric position, I'm going to have to navigate many of the same problems as anybody else in a company of any size. There's more to satisfaction and success than weaving brilliant data narratives. There's working with other departments--not just responding to their needs but proactively reaching out to coordinate on updating processes, building rapport, and information exchange. There's operating on a higher level, putting myself in front of executives and clients. Executives can be petty, self-centered, egotistical jerks just like the stereotypes suggest, but they can also be brilliant and down-to-earth and easygoing and kind and appreciative of the value you bring to the company. Same thing with clients and business partners. I have excellent professional contacts that have come from all of those areas. 

I'm not talking about schmoozing. I could *never* be a sales guy. And boy when I say never, I mean never. I can't do small talk, or push products in casual conversation. I own that, and I respect people who have those abilities. What I can do is operate in a professianal, cordial, competent capacity with everybody inside my company and out, not just if they need something from me, but proactively to offer up my services. It's not just for the sake of my career and advancement. It's for my own sense of competence and feeling I have a place of belonging in a company. 

I suppose my main point to all this is to say that a position in data science is not just about doing data science. As a research analyst, I spent probably half my time fielding calls or visits from employees with questions, and putting on the dog-and-pony shows to demonstrate low-level stuff to higher-level staff. Frankly, few people ever saw the most brilliant stuff I devised. As with any other job, it's about working positively with the people around me, raising my hand when there is something to be done (even if it's 'not in my job description'!), and if I don't feel like I'm adding value, fighting to re-craft my position so that it has greater impact. Is the existing infrastructure insufficient for me to do my job? Maybe I can build it. I've seldeom had a prouder professional achievement than having HR come and ask me to write my own job title and description. Twice.

I don't mean to sound ra-ra-ra for corporations. The corporate model probaby deserves a lot of the negative press, having some inherent flaws that create a toxicicity both within the company, and for their place of responsibility in the greater world. I wouldn't adivise staying at a given company out of loyalty, because they really will cut you loose the moment they feel the decision is best for them. It's sort of acccording to their design. This is about being part of a team; of coordinating with the group of people, like them or not, that I spend more of my life with than anyone else. If I don't work effectively with them, I'll always be an outsider perpetually susceptable to the whims of 'politics' over which I have no control. Coming in combative from the start is going to be ruinous for me and them.

Nobody's making money if the company's not making money, and if it's not, I might find myself leaving my data science job with no say in the matter.
